---
title: "Modeling the transmission dynamics and control of lymphatic filariasis (Wuchereria bancrofti parasites) in Papua New Guinea"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2013/04-R_Bani_2012
date: 2013/02/01
venue: 'researchgate'
paperurl: 'https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Ridouan_Bani/publication/279993915_Modeling_the_transmission_dynamics_and_control_of_lymphatic_filariasis_Wuchereria_bancrofti_parasites_in_Papua_New_Guinea/links/55a2194608aea815dffc10db/Modeling-the-transmission-dynamics-and-control-of-lymphatic-filariasis-Wuchereria-bancrofti-parasites-in-Papua-New-Guinea.pdf'
excerpt: ''
citation: 'Bani, Ridouan, Daniel Tisch, Mohammed D. Yunusa, Anuj Mubayi, and Marian Gidea. "Modeling the transmission dynamics and control of lymphatic filariasis (Wuchereria bancrofti parasites) in Papua New Guinea." (2013).'
---
Abstract:A deterministic model was developed and analyzed to investigate the dynamics of lymphatic filariasis disease through mosquitoes in four stages of human population based on the
microfilariae and antibody levels. The stages are functions of transmission rates, reproduction,
mortality, drug chemotherapy, bednet usage and insecticide spraying. The survival of the infected mosquitoes (vector) depends on the size of the load of microfilariae engorged.This disease
is significantly a public health problem in many countries, especially Papua New Guinea (PNG)
where the level of transmission of wuchereria bancrofti parasite and body manifestation of the
disease register among the highest in the world. Data from Papua New Guinea are used to
estimate some of the parameters in the model that was analyzed based on a system of six ordinary differential equations. It was established that the disease free equilibrium was locally
asymptotically stable. The model was also found to be globally asymptotically stable when the
basic reproduction number was less than unity. It was also revealed that the disease invaded the
endemic population at R0 = 1 near the disease free equilibrium point. Results in our simulations
indicated a combination of drug chemotherapy, use of bed-nets and insecticide residual spraying
as most efficient measures in controlling the disease in Papua New Guinea.

[Download paper here](https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Ridouan_Bani/publication/279993328_Burden_of_Chlamydia_in_the_United_States_Trend_Analysis_of_Incidence_Rates/links/55a20c7908aea54aa8145279/Burden-of-Chlamydia-in-the-United-States-Trend-Analysis-of-Incidence-Rates.pdf)

Recommended citation: Bani, Ridouan, Daniel Tisch, Mohammed D. Yunusa, Anuj Mubayi, and Marian Gidea. "Modeling the transmission dynamics and control of lymphatic filariasis (Wuchereria bancrofti parasites) in Papua New Guinea." (2013).
