---
title: "Methamphetamine Abuse Dynamics in the state of California"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2013/05-R_Bani_2012
date: 2013/01/01
venue: 'researchgate'
paperurl: 'https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Ridouan_Bani/publication/279993661_Methamphetamine_Abuse_Dynamics_in_the_state_of_California/links/55a2186008ae1c0e046417ef.pdf'
excerpt: ''
citation: 'Hameed, Rasheed, Ridouan Bani, Anuj Mubayi, Carlos Castillo-Chavez, and Paul J. Gruenewald. "Methamphetamine Abuse Dynamics in the state of California." (2013).'
---
Abstract:Methamphetamine abuse in the state of California has become an epidemic, where
the state has been battling to control the spread of methamphetamine abuse with little
to no success in various regions. Special precursor laws have been placed in California
to stop its production and spread of this pshyo-stimulant drug. However, the impact
of these laws has done very little on the production and sale of methamphetamine and
in some cases cause imports from Mexico to increase and become more organized. The
majority of the prior literature focus has been on the effectiveness of law officials and
drug distribution and there is a widening gap about the social nature and dynamics of
methamphetamine abuse. Understanding the dynamics of spread of methamphetamine
abuse as a function of changing social structure can help understand the key components for controlling its abuse. We develop a mathematical model that captures the
dynamics of methamphetamine abuse spread in California where social influences may
result in new methamphetamine abusers. The model stratifies the population into two
sub-populations: at-risk and not-at-risk populations. The not-at-risk population is the
feeder for at-risk population whereas at-risk population is further divided into susceptible, methamphetamine users, users under treatment, users incarcerated for possession,
and temporally recovered individuals. We use the concepts from epidemiology relating to the spread of infectious disease and compute the methamphetamine reproduction number (R0), defined as the average number of new users generated by a typical user in
a nave population. The various data sets include hospital discharge cases for methamphetamine related diagnosis, methamphetamine possession arrests data and, Treatment
Episode Data Sets (TEDS). The model assumes data for hospital discharge cases as
the methamphetamine user population, the arrest data for arrest population and the
TEDS data for users under treatment. These data sets are used for estimation of the
model parameters. Uncertainty and sensitivity analysis were performed to capture the
variations in the methamphetamine patterns. Our hope is that the study results will
identify mechanisms responsible for increasing temporal patterns of methamphetamine
abusers in California.

[Download paper here](https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Ridouan_Bani/publication/279993661_Methamphetamine_Abuse_Dynamics_in_the_state_of_California/links/55a2186008ae1c0e046417ef.pdf)

Recommended citation: Hameed, Rasheed, Ridouan Bani, Anuj Mubayi, Carlos Castillo-Chavez, and Paul J. Gruenewald. "Methamphetamine Abuse Dynamics in the state of California." (2013).
